Bob Cornish, I'm in the office of Roberta
Burroughs, B-U-R-R-O-U-G-H-S.
Roberta, tell us what your title is and what kind of
responsibilities you have in the planning
department. I am assistant director for
redevelopment. My responsibilities include
housing, economic development, neighborhood
planning, and the Community Development Block
Grant. Okay, that's quite a bit. Yes. How many
people report to you? Approximately 34.
What is your academic background? I have a degree
in regional planning, city and regional planning
at the Masses level from Cornell. And I have a
sociology degree, a bachelor's degree, from
Hampton Institute, now called Hampton
University. In Washington. It's in Hampton,
Virginia. It's pretty close to Washington. Okay,
where were you before you came to Houston? At
Cornell. This is your first job right out of
school. Yes, I was an intern here even. Is that
right? Between my first and second year in
graduate school, I was an intern here. Well, since
you've been in Houston, you've also become active
in APA. Could you describe your activities in APA
for us? I have been the local section director
twice. What were those years? And
I'm
now the membership chairperson for the state
chapter and looking at running for a national
board seat. I haven't decided which one.
What does your division do? Let me rephrase that.
How do you find you spend most of your time?
I spend most of my time involved with the Community
Development Block Grant in one fashion or
another, writing and or reviewing guidelines,
writing and or reviewing contracts to try to get
the money spent. I spend a lot of time writing, not
writing, reviewing neighborhood plans. I also
spend a great deal of time with the small business
loan program, either writing or reviewing
guidelines for it. And
with the rental rehab program.
I understand that the planning department here
Planning and Development Department now,
inherited quite a few programs that I think in your
case were the subject of some criminal acts and
unfortunate maneuvers by previous employees and
whatnot. Would you like to go into some of that for
the record?
The division where the alleged, I guess, I'm not
sure whether they're alleged. I think people were
actually convicted. I think they were, yeah. That
division was spun off from the department before I
inherited the community development
responsibilities. It now resides in the public
works department. So my relationship with them is
one of coordination. So I really am not all that
familiar with the facts of what happened. It's my
understanding that shabby rehab work was being
approved in return for bribes. We kind of cleaned
house and set it up in the Public Works Department
where we feel it's more appropriately housed
because of their role in handling inspections and
Because of their experience and that kind of
thing. So that's what's happened with that. You
have three divisions under you. Neighborhood
planning, CD grant management, and economic
development. Could we talk a little bit about
economic development, particularly in view of
the depressed economy of Texas and Houston in
particular? We have several programs that are
designed to stimulate economic redevelopment in
low-moderate income areas, which is an area that
encompasses roughly a third of the entire city.
And most of our programs rely upon funding from the
Community Development Block Grant. We have a
small business revolving on fund program the
small business owners who are doing business, who
are located in one of our low-moderate income
areas, they can, the way the program is presently
structured, they can apply, business owners can
apply for a tandem loan, which means we will make
half the loan. The other half has to come from the
bank. But we are in the process of amending that
program because we found that banks are really not
very interested right now in loaning money in the
low-model neighborhoods. So we are amending the
program to allow us to make direct loans to small
business owners who are located in our areas. And
we can also do facade loans. Where does this money
come from? That's from the Community Development
Block Grant. That's the source of capital for the
program. We've set aside a million and a half
dollars. And it will revolve. Payments will
revolve back. And if we run out, we will reprogram
community development funds to put more money
into it. Do you charge an interest? Yes, we're
charging 6% interest on those. The tandem loans,
the interest right now is half a prime. But we're
proposing to change that to 6% so we don't have a
real mixed portfolio. So it will all be 6%. Well,
that's quite an interesting program. Yeah, I'm
really excited about that program in particular.
It's something that planners, it's the kind of
thing planners don't traditionally get a chance
to get involved with. So I'm learning a lot about
banking and lending and being a bank. We're
learning a lot about being a bank because we also
service our loans, both housing and small
business and So we're having to learn how to be
bankers as well as planners. Do you have any staff
members who have had banking experience? Yes.
That must be a help. The small business person
does, yeah. It was hard to find him, too, because
our pay scales are not at the bank level. No. And we
searched for many months, and we have someone
we're really happy with. Well, the climate for
planning seems to have changed with the election
of Catherine Whitmer, and then with the
appointment of a new planning director. And of
course the size of the staff has more than doubled,
and I would expect that morale would be
subsequently raised. with all of these changes
and opportunities that have been made available
to planners? I think from the standpoint of people
being a lot more able to do the things that they were
trained to do in planning school, morale is
certainly higher. Of course, you have to take into
account that everyone's pay was cut 3% last year.
So that's almost counterbalanced to all the
wonderful changes that are taking place
professionally in the professional arena for
planters here. But I think that we're able to see, I
know I personally am involved in a lot of things
that I had never been involved before, and that's
very exciting and challenging. And that's the
case for most everybody. with the possible
exception of our community development people
who are more or less doing what they've always
done, but I think doing it a lot better.
The year that Ephraim, in fact, the day that
Ephraim became planning director, it was
announced that the city budget was going to be cut
15%. So if your salaries were only cut 3%, I suppose
that the planning department made out quite well
on a across the board basis. Not really. The
salaries were cut citywide, and the reason it
impaired morale so greatly is because the idea,
the city council did that over the mayor's
objection, and the idea was the mayor wanted to lay
off people, and city council did not want them laid
off, so as an alternative, they cut our pay, but
people were still laid off. So the way that people
feel city-wide, this isn't just the planning
department that was affected, is it was
pointless. People, I think, were willing to make
the sacrifice if it meant that their co-workers
were kept on the payroll. But both things
happened. Pay was cut and people were laid off.
Except in the planning department, you added. We
did not lay off anybody. In fact, you were hiring,
weren't you? And we still are. We're in a hiring
mode right now, even. Maybe I should apply. Well, I
should probably tell you that the previous
personnel director went through and cut all of the
pay grades for planners, which is a source of
morale among the people whose classification is
planner. So we had on the one hand something that
really was designed to raise morale,
that had the effect of raising morale. And then on
the other hand, we had this counter bailing
forces, so somehow the personnel department did
not get the word that planning was going to be
elevated. Well, maybe between Ephraim and the
mayor that could be changed. Yeah, we're working
on it. The politics are not right right now to raise
anybody's pay, but I think it'll happen. Yeah,
probably. It sounds like it might. Yeah, it'll
happen. It's just too big an inequity and
injustice to not be righted. Sure.
Let me ask you then, would you have much to do with
the new comprehensive planning process? Yes, by
virtue of the fact that the neighborhood planning
division is part of this operation. The
neighborhood planners have in fact been working
for about a year on neighborhood plans, and there
are three that are in the draft stage, so we'll be
able to move fairly quickly with those three plans
through this whole process of review and
adoption. And it's very, it's really good. I came
here in 73 as a neighborhood planner. And the
frustration that we had, those of us who were
neighborhood planners at that time, was that the
plans were not tied to any kind of implementation
mechanism. But now they will be tied to the CIP, and
also the CDBG money is under the purview of this
department. So to have a neighborhood plan and
CDBG in the same department really helps when you
talk about getting the plans implemented,
because we have the money to implement them. And
then also you have your new development
ordinance. Right. Yeah. And that would provide a
certain amount of guidance. Yeah, that will have
less of an impact on us because there isn't a lot of
new development that will take place in our areas.
And the development ordinance really guides,
sets forth, codifies standards for new
development. So actually, the planning
resolution is what will impact us more, which is
council will actually adopt the plans, which
means they'll feel some ownership in them. Some
identification. Yeah. Of course, there's been
quite a shift in policy direction in the city, away
from what was almost exclusively attention to the
New Grove fringe areas, to the inward-looking
redevelopment and recycling of inner-city land
and the land that had been passed over. Of course,
that's where your interests lie, as I understand
it. And this, of course, would have consequences
for inner city densities and for commute
patterns, which I guess would be in line with what
Metro is doing at the moment and whatnot.
Yeah, we actually, again, because we have the
money to put behind the philosophy, we won't be
able to have a great deal of influence on
redevelopment by paying for it or creating
incentives we have most of our economic
development programs are leveraging programs
they're designed to leverage private sector
involvement so as to make the money go further so we
have a whole package of incentives and the small
business was one i touched on earlier we also have a
tax abatement ordinance that we're using
extensively to create in these revitalization
areas tax abatement districts And then we have
what we call a targeted opportunity program where
we can fund major projects in the inner city areas
that create jobs. So we have a whole package of
incentives that are available.
I'm interested in public housing. And I don't see
anything down here called public housing in your
organizational chart. No, the Houston Housing
Authority is a separate entity in Houston. with a
separate board. You have Housing Finance
Corporation under your Economic Development
Division. That's about as close as you come to
public housing, I would suppose. Yes, and that's
not public housing. That entity issues mortgage
revenue bonds, and we coordinate with them. The
other three that are listed there, we actually
provide staff support. The tax exempt bond
issuers. Well, the Housing Authority, maybe I'm
talking to, I should talk with them, but I was just
wondering, you must know what their plans are for
an Allen Parkway housing project. I know they plan
to sell it. It's occupying very valuable land.
Yes. And Ephraim was saying that they haven't been
putting people into it for several years. And by
attrition, it has become almost exclusively
housed by Vietnamese. And
that they're hoping to construct their own or come
up with their own cooperative housing. Some of
this seems to be quite innovative. Yes, this will
be the first co-op housing that's been done in
Houston. And it's another thing we're really
excited about. And everything seems to be falling
into place. HUD is committed. We're committed. We
have interested developers.
It should happen. As far as I know, the Housing
Authority hasn't gotten any official word from
HUD as to whether they'll be able to sell the
project. But it's my understanding that they are
making plans to house people in other parts of the
city in scattered site housing, though.
Actually, that's the philosophy. It's still
scattered sites. Yeah. They don't want to do any
more of those giant projects, which are kind of
hard to keep up. It puts all of the people who have
problems in one place. Well, it
institutionalizes people. Right. You know,
that's the sad part of it. They just feel caught up
in something they can't break out of. Well, okay.
Are there any other points you'd like to bring up
for the history of planning in Houston?
I've seen four mayors come and go. Who were they?
When I came, Louis Welch was mayor. He represented
the Chamber of Commerce. Well, when he left here,
he went to work for the Chamber of Commerce. Some
say that he worked for the Chamber of Commerce
while he was mayor. Some have said that, but I
didn't say that. I'll never say it. And then who
followed him? Hoffines followed him, then
McCann. Hoffines had two terms? Yeah. And McCann
had two, I believe. And this is the second term.
He's bankrupt now. He's what? He's bankrupt now.
Did he declare bankruptcy? Yeah, that's
according to Ethan. Yeah, I saw him the other day at
a fundraiser, but I didn't. Maybe he's raising
funds to get out. Well, there was a fundraiser for
the council members. And then, of course,
Catherine. Yeah, yeah. And then you served under
Roscoe.
Did you have the same area of responsibility with
Roscoe? No, I was the manager when he left of the
neighborhood revitalization division. So I had
been, I came as a neighborhood planner, and so
that's been predominantly my work experience. My
responsibilities expanded. I was promoted. And
my responsibilities expanded, so I was exposed
for the first time to the block grant. And to
housing programs, I had a lot of housing
experience that I never had. And also economic
development, that was totally new. What happened
is, under the previous mayors, the economic
development division was part of the mayor's
office. And so was the community development
division. So what happened is all those got merged
and I inherited them. I was the lucky winner. But
it's been a real good experience for me. I like it.
Oh, yeah. I would think so. I like it a lot. That
would be very challenging. Yeah. In different
ways. Yeah, a lot of different ways. Well,
Roberta, I want to thank you for your time. You're
welcome. You'll be getting a transcript of this
whenever we can get around to doing it, and then I
would like to ask you to review and make any
corrections or additions that come to your mind at
that time, and return it as soon as you can. As you
know, I'm trying to get a draft together for the
chapter conference in Houston next year. And I'll
have to start writing it well in advance of the
actual meeting. Oh, yes. So getting all this put
together is going to be quite a task. Yeah. Thank
you for your participation. Oh, you're welcome.
Is planning history kind of a niche of yours? I
teach at A&M. Do you know John Rapps? Yes, very
well. Do you? I was at a reception for him in April
when they had it during the APA conference in New
York. Oh, yes. And I hadn't seen him since 73. So I
figured you might know him and that you might be
friends since you're in the same area since I don't
imagine there are a lot of people in that area
playing him. Well, I was responsible for his
invitation to our centennial at Texas A&M, and he
gave by far the best presentation for a college.
Then we're both members of the Society for
American City and Regional Planning History. And
he's been a big help to me. Thank you. You're
welcome. It's June 26. We're in the office of Mike
Davis at Metro in Houston. Mike, what is your
title? I'm an environmental planner,
environmental planner three. OK. What do you do in
Metro? I'm involved with assisting in developing
environmental impact statements,
environmental assessments on any capital
projects that Metro does that involve
expenditure of federal funds. That's the
environmental clearance process. OK. Why don't
you give us a quick rundown on Metro, how it came
into being? what its mission is and what its
funding is. Okay, why don't we hold?
Okay. So your mission and your funding. Okay, the
organization was created after a local
referendum where voters were asked if they wished
to dedicate an extra penny sales tax to fund mass
transit in Houston. When was that? This was in
1978. The referendum passed, and we've been
operating since that time. Metro was formerly
known as Hugh Tran and was part of the city of
Houston, operated as the transit department of
the city of Houston, and had a seriously
deteriorated fleet. It was a typical transit kind
of development historically. The first transit
in Houston was mule-pulled trolleys on rail
tracks that progressed to a full streetcar system
that was run by a variety of owners. I think most of
it was probably developed by Stone and Webster
Engineering. And then eventually, just the
historical pattern, I'm sure it's not much
different in any city, where the slowly after
World War II buses became more popular because of
their effectiveness in the suburbanization
trend. Eventually, the system became severely
deteriorated. And this is typical. The city took
it over, operated
it in a pretty shabby state because of lack of
revenue from the system. And then I don't know.
This report will document it much better than I can
date-wise. There were some stirrings for
improvements to the mass transit system over the
years, and that eventually led to the 1978
referendum, which created Metro as a
Metropolitan Transit Authority. This
document... Then, after the authority was
created, there were some problems with the
directors, as I recall. There were a whole...
series of executive directors. The executive
director that was on board at the time the
organization was created left not soon
thereafter, and there were some allocation, some
problems with what was perceived as extravagance
among the administrative levels of the
organization. I wasn't here at the time, I don't
know how much of that is true, but I do remember the
perceptions, just at that time I was I guess in
graduate school myself. At A&M. At A&M. And there
seems to have been some extravagances. I would
think it would have been just a very heady time just
to suddenly have promised an incredible mission
and have your funding source secure a relatively
inadequate source of funding to enable you to do
things right. So I'm sure there could well have
been some excesses. I'm not the one to speak to
that. I have no proof other than reading it in the
papers a long time ago. But the important thing is,
overall, the system has improved dramatically
from its deteriorated state, where we're now one
of the best. We are about the best bus transit
system for a major city in the US. Seattle's doing
quite well, too. I think the rankings are just out
on the wards. The American Public Transit
Association gives that every year. And we
continue to receive high marks because we're
running about 98% on-time performance, which is
an incredible increase. The miles between road
calls on our buses have increased in excess of the
100,000 mile mark, and it used to be like 50 miles or
whatever. So the statistics prove that the
organization has become a very good, solid,
dependable bus transit system. And a lot of the
problems that you experienced for a few years were
problems over which the organization had no
control, such as the new buses that kept breaking.
Well, the issue there was one of the largest
priorities in what Metro defined they needed to do
when they were proposing the sales tax referendum
was to get acceptable maintenance facilities
online. There was just no provision for
maintenance. The old Milby Bus Barn site, you
know, used since the horse-drawn days, was the
only facility that was there. There was no way to
maintain the bus, even if you had the money at that
time. So one of the earliest projects to go into
effect was building a cashmere operating
facility. It's a heavy maintenance facility,
which is an incredible facility. Well, I think my
point is, too, that it wasn't the problem. It
wasn't generated by the city, but because of their
lack of maintenance facilities, but by the
designer of the buses. That was one issue. Some of
the buses, some of the earliest buses bought from
Metro and the ones that were inherited from the
huge . The frames would break. Were the flexibles
that had severe problems. A lot of re-engineering
went into them. And then aside from those
problems, The buses couldn't air condition
enough to keep the system cool. And the big
priority was to make the system efficient and
rideable. And there was no way to cool the buses.
And the air conditionings on those things were
rebuilt time after time. The problem was
eventually solved. Some major re-engineering
that the manufacturer had to take on and pick up the
tab for. But some of those buses are still in use.
And they actually function. The one I ride on, the
82 Westheimer route, is an old bus from that
vintage. And it will freeze you to death. And so
they do work. We have what's called a hot box at
Cashmere, which generates excessive
temperatures. And before buying a bus, we test it
in that box. We superheat it to the equivalent of
being 130 degrees inside. And we time it on how long
it takes it to cool down to a comfort level for a
person to be sitting in the bus. And that facility
is used by other transit organizations in the US
who are testing buses. So we've been able to
develop those kind of facilities to make sure the
system functions. One of the things I have for you
here to keep on track is this particular document.
It's the document that was developed Metro,
metropolitan transit for Harris County. State of
July 78. July 78. This document lists the regional
transit plan. This is the plan that was prepared to
promote the creation of the transit authority,
and this is the guide that we began with, the
initial comprehensive plan, you might say. This
document gives you a proposal of the kind of system
that we want to build and announce the existing
conditions, and proposes
the major issues that we should address. And in
going through this document, you'll get an idea.
There's developing ideas like developing the
Contra Flow Lane, which was put into use very
early, developing permanent transit facilities
and the means of freeways, which is a project that
At the end of our current five-year capital
improvement plan, we'll have 69 miles of those
facilities. They're going in all over the place
now. We're building now on Gulf Freeway 29 to the
northwest, North Freeway, the Katy, and we're in
design on the final design. We've had
environmental clearance to build the one on the
southwest freeway. Nothing on the southern
freeway? The South Freeway. South Freeway. South
Freeway is proposing a lot of, it's included as one
of the facilities, a facility probably, I believe
it's a phase three project. It would be included
also one on the East Texas Freeway, which is 59
North. Potentially a facility would be included
there. The Highway Department is working on
initiating a widening project on East Tech's now,
and the cross-section they're acquiring will
include enough right-of-way for a median bus line
in the middle of the freeway. So those are
long-range. You must have a good working
relationship with the Division of Highways.
Of course, we all coordinate through what we
always call the 3C planning process. The
Houston-Galveston Council, the local H2C, is the
MPO, the Metropolitan Planning Organization for
Houston area. And everything coordinates
through that. All our projects that we're
proposing go through the clearance process to be
included on their unified work program, to be on
the transportation improvement program. So that
everything is coordinated there. We have a good
relationship with them, of course, because we
have to have their permission to be in.
right-of-ways of freeways and state highways.
And that hasn't been a problem. The Southwest
Freeway Transitway that's being built is a
cooperative project with the Highway
Department. At the time they're upgrading the
freeway, we'll be constructing the transitway
itself. So it's a two-fold project. Upon
completion, the freeway will have been
rehabilitated in the transitway. And there's
also There's an organization that is referred to
as the Super Group, which is the occasional
meeting of the big guys, like the mayors of
Houston. our general manager, Mr. Keeper, and Mr.
Lanier of the Highway Commission, and all the
folks who are managing the organizations that
affect the transportation system, who meet on a
relatively regular basis to assure there's
coordination.
Oh, gosh. I can't remember how long ago the Houston
Chamber of Commerce initiated the regional
mobility plan, which is sort of like a wish list of
all the transportation projects that would be
needed to improve travel times and to reduce
congestion. I think they targeted a 1978 level of
congestion when the project was started to bring
travel times back to those parameters. So that's
also a coordinating project that the regional
mobility committee meets on a continual basis.
And we consider the regional transit plan, which
has now been adopted by the board, to be a component
of that overall plan, too. So the coordination, I
think, is working very well. We also, you probably
discussed with Mr. Garcia about the new
comprehensive planning process. Right. I have
that down pat. Okay. You know, Metro's involved in
that as on the technical advisory committee. So I
feel that coordination goes pretty well. We also,
one of our missions as a transit authority is to
assist in what we call TSM, Transportation System
Management Projects. which will improve travel
times for our buses. These are street-level
improvements to the existing transportation
system. We initially committed, and the 78
document commits, about $150 million to
cooperative projects with the city of Houston,
Harris County, and the other municipalities in
our metro region. to do those improvements. So we
are tied in with the city of Houston's capital
improvement program as a funding source and a
cooperative builder of a lot of the improvements
in their transportation. Yes. Roberta mentioned
that. And it was quite surprising to me to hear that
Metro was actually helping to reconstruct some of
the city streets. We've done some major projects.
grade separations or a lot of them in the
construction of West Park which is a major
thoroughfare with grade separations and grade
separations over railroad tracks and some
intersections and that's a continuing project
that benefits us by getting our buses a non
congested route or a route that's not doesn't
suffer the vagaries of the railroad schedule,
because that obviously would ruin your ability to
maintain a reliable schedule for a bus if it's got
to wait for a railroad crossing. We identified in
this plan we were discussing earlier, the 78 plan,
identifies potential locations for all of the
joint capital projects that we're proposing. And
we recently looked over a document We made a report
to the board of directors on how close we've come to
fulfilling this initial plan, and I think we've
done a very good job. The board recently, within
the last three or four months, approved an update
of the joint projects list. And so that continues.
One of the things going on right now with the city of
Bel Air, I don't know if you've talked to Sarah
Janer, and they're working on their tax increment
reinvestment zone. to revive their little
five-point or seven-point intersection that's
their downtown. Metro's contributing in that
project, and we're building a transit center in
the middle of that project. So it's part of the
street reconstruction and bus routing
improvements that they're doing there. So the
coordination part, I think, is being handled very
well. It appears to be handled much better than I
think the general perception of the public
allows. Maybe the media have been doing as much as
they could in terms of indicating how well things
are working. They always report on when things
seem to fail. Building a project, getting it done
on time, in budget, that sort of thing is not news
work. No. Only if it's racked with You know,
structural problems, fraud. Yeah. Yeah. Unless
it's bad, it doesn't get sensational coverage.
Criminal acts. Yeah. You know, because pretty
much our evaluation shows that we're building
things on our capital projects. We're doing well.
We're living up to our commitments. Only
revisions that time in engineering and planning
approve. There's some cases where a project just
isn't going to work as it was originally proposed
when you get down to, you know, specific planning.
In most cases, our capital projects are going as
proposed. Our operations have improved
dramatically, as we were discussing before.
Reduction in the number of accidents and
improvements in service and on-time performance
and the fact that the buses are clean and safe and we
operate our own security force. Do you have any
radio communication on your buses? All the buses
are tied to a communication system. And the bus
system is completely connected. They all have
two-way radios. They can communicate back and
forth. If there's a problem on a bus, it can be
relayed to a central communications center
that's located out at our cashmere maintenance
facility. From that location, they handle
dispatching the transit police if it's a security
problem. Or, you know, maintenance issues are
handled there. In a case if a bus breaks down on Post
Oak, you can call in immediately and a substitute
bus can be sent out to deal with the problem. You
know, or other buses can be rerouted from their
route to pick up the patrons to reduce the lag time.
What we're also doing, we have a major capital
project that's a surveillance control system
that we're building on the Katy Freeway, which
will be an infrared communication system that
will allow you to monitor the entire length of the
transitway. with on-site cameras for security
purposes and to see if vehicles are broken down on
the transit way and to monitor the location of the
vehicle. So it will be a major system that
hopefully will eventually be extended to all the
transit centers. Has Metro considered other
modes of transportation? Sure. In developing the
regional plan, which this first document
reflects and which some of these later reports get
you into more specific analysis of the regional
plan, a technology assessment was done. And a lot
of different technologies have been looked at.
The basic conclusion of that assessment is that we
will remain primarily a bus system. Even given our
current proposal where phase two would be a system
connector linking transit centers and transit
ways and local routes, that would be about 14 miles
of light rail, surface rail with overhead
electric power source. Even given that scenario,
we will still be primarily a bus system with
approximately 2,000 miles worth of local routes
operating in our region. There are areas where
congestion warrants, travel time warrants,
potential ridership and operations savings
warrant building some fixed guideways and that's
what the board's currently mulling over in phase
two in what in the quarter we're evaluating now.
With the changed focus of the new planning and
development department under Captain Whitmer
toward infills within the inner city and more
attention to redevelopment and recycling of land
closed in. That might be building densities that
would be more amenable to fixed rail than would
have been historically the case. This is a real
difficult issue and it continues to plague the
board and they're trying to make a decision about
the actual nuts and bolts of what our regional
system will look like.
That density issue is, I think, an interesting
one. I'm not sure that even to our current planning
horizons of year 2000 to year 2010, that that will
make a major difference. It comes down to looking
at primarily the biggest demand upon our transit
system will be home-based work trips, commuting
from home to work, regardless of where home is,
whether it's inner city or suburban. And
providing that service requires looking at
activity centers that are developed and
providing service to them. In the course of doing
that, I think you can adequately provide service
to major activity centers to people inner city
through the local system. And then for the
congested corridors, the freeway corridors,
getting people from the suburbs into activity
centers, which are primarily downtown, the
uptown City Post Oak area, the Greenway Plaza
area, and the Texas Medical Center. Those are our
primary activity centers. Serving those areas,
we need the transitways, the fixed guideways, to
get you from suburban locations into these areas
and to get you between them. the local route system
that's developed feeds into that proposed
grander system of fixed guideways and provides
really good travel times. So I think even given to
sum up the highest densification you could
predict based on that planning initiative, the
comprehensive planning process, I think the
local routes would still provide the best
service. Because if it is a dense system, it needs
frequent stops. And frequent stops would not
likely justify a heavy capital fixed guideway
system. To achieve some kind of operating cost and
increase your speed and efficiency, you have to
limit the number of stops
that are made. One thing I should probably do to
just get us on track is we went through several
planning refinements based on this toward the
board's development of a regional transit plan.
This was the initial proposed system and then the
board and staff have continued to study the issue
from that time and provide that plan. What our
regional transit plan They considered a variety
of options, and you are probably familiar with the
options A, B, and C discussions that were done. So
by 1984, we had a system that looked similar to the
one referred to in this map. I'm referring to
regional transit planning background briefing
material, fall of 84.
Getting to that required some initial planning
efforts, Bob, where we looked This is before my
time, so I hope I don't get them out of sequence. We
looked at an original corridor that looked like
it's where we should look at putting a fixed
guideway system, that there was the population,
the density, the ridership. That's the West Park
Southwest corridor. The original proposal was to
run a heavy rail facility from about,
I guess, Willcrest, a north-south running
thoroughfare in West Houston along the West Park
alignment to where it transitioned into the
southwest freeway alignment intercity running
into downtown and being subway downtown. That was
the original proposal that was eventually
refined into what was called a spine corridor
report that expanded that. That alignment was
extended further west I think, to Highway 6. Or no,
excuse me, to Westvale, which is inside Highway 6,
running back along that same West Park alignment,
running through downtown and north to Crosstown,
which is north of town, which greatly expanded the
length of that system. That was proposed as a heavy
rail system. The authority does not have the legal
authority to issue bonds based on our sales tax
revenue without voter approval. And when the
authority went to the public for a vote on issuing
bonds to Bill,